README.md, before:

require - a validation library
==============================

Aims to provide a comfortable way to validate any kind of input by defining
a clonable base ( similar to what formencode does ), implementing a set of
atomic core validators and a way to 'Compose' new validators from existing
ones.

Maintains a serializable state called 'Context' throughout each valditation
process which allows storing of input dependant metadata and provides
"validation on demand".
The Context can also be used to populate forms or to set request specific
parameters.


# Why bother ?

* Navigation through your data is easily done using
  `context( 'my.child.context' )` once you have created a Context.

* You do not need to maintain a certain order for Fields which are depending
  on other fields, because validation takes place on demand.
  E.g. this will work:

        Schema\
            ( 'email_confirm' , Match( Field('.email') )
            , 'email' , String()
            )

* Relative access by path of Fields during validation
  ( Field('..someChild') retrieves the value from a child called someChild
    relative to the parent context; root can be addressed by using '/' ).

* Access fields by index during validation ( `Field('.(0)')` will retrieve the
  value of the first field while `Field('.(-1)')` retrieves the last )

* Schemas can handle lists natively, because defined fields do have an order.
  One could use them to validate the \*varargs of a function or in chain after
  Split() and the like.

* Easy serialization of the whole context, containing errors and values which
  should be re-populated ( e.g. when your domain validator lowers the input ).

* Punycode-aware DomainLabel, Domain, and Email validator.


# Getting started

## Because we all like Hello World's

1) create a Validator

    >>> from require import *
    >>> Hello = String() \
        & Tmp( alter.Lower() & In( ['world', 'bob'] ) ) \
        & alter.Format('Hello %(value)s !')

*Note*: The `Tmp` validator means: do not return the result. 
In this case, `In` uses the result of `alter.Lower`, while the input value
for `alter.Format` remains unmodified.

2) bring the validator and a value into a context

    >>> context = Hello.context( 'World' )

3) get the result

    >>> context.result
    u'Hello World !'

set another value

    >>> context.value = 'Bob'

re-validate

    >>> context.result
    u'Hello Bob !'


##  Errors

    >>> context.value = 42
    >>> context.result
    Traceback ( most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: Invalid type (int), must be a string
    >>> context.error
    'Invalid type (int), must be a string'

### Custom error messages

    >>> Hello = String().messages(type='This is not a string, it is a "%(value.type)s" !') \
        & Tmp\
            ( alter.Lower()
            & In\
                ( ['world', 'bob']
                ).messages(fail='Please enter "bob" or "world", not "%(value)s".')
            ) \
        & alter.Format('Hello %(value)s !')
    >>> Hello.context( 42 ).result
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: This is not a string, it is a "int" !

### The errorFormatter

Errors messages are generated on demand and after the validation process, using an
`errorFormatter`. One can use his own function - which, for example, does the l13n stuff,
or retrieves messages by a certain error ID.

    >>> context.errorFormatter = lambda context, error:\
        ("Error at %s: %s" % (context.path, error.message ) ) % error.extra
    >>> context.error
    'Error at /: Invalid type (int), must be a string'


## Composing

Composing is useful if you want to reuse a certain validator with different
parameters or messages.

*Note*: Please take a look at `require.validator.web` for advanced
tag usage, since `DomainLabel`, `Domain`, `EmailLocalPart`, `Email` and `DateField`
are all composed.

    >>> Hello = Compose\
        ( String().tag('inputType') \
        & debug.Print('Entered: %(value)s').tag('printInput',False) \
        & Tmp\
            ( alter.Lower()
            & In\
                ( ['world', 'bob']
                ).tag('restrictInput')
            ) \
        & alter.Format('Hello %(value)s !').tag('output')
        ).paramAlias\
        ( restrict='restrictInput_required'
        ).messageAlias\
        ( restrict='restrictInput_fail'
        )

*Note*: An alias is a [tagName]_[parameterName] or a list of them or a function
returning a list of them.

    >>> myHello = Hello\
        ( restrict=['there','bob']
        , output_formatter='Hey %(value)s !'
        , printInput_enabled=True
        ).messages(restrict='Please enter one of %(required)s')
    >>> context = myHello.context( 'there' )
    >>> context.result
    Entered: there
    u'Hey there !
    >>> context.value = 42
    >>> context.result
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: Invalid type (int), must be a string


## Schemas

A `Schema` takes dicts or list-likes as input and will return a dict or a list
if used with returnList=True.

*Note*: please take a look at require.validator.web.Email for some real-world
example

    >>> HelloSchema = Schema\
        ( 'nick'
            , String() & Len(max=20)
        , 'email'
            , web.Email()
        , 'email_confirm'
            , Match( Field('.email'), ignoreCase=True )
        )
    >>> context = HelloSchema.context\
        (   { 'nick':'bob'
            , 'email':'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
            }
        )
    >>> context('nick').result
    u'bob'
    >>> context('email').result
    u'Bob@some.domain.org'

    >>> from pprint import pprint
    >>> pprint( context.result )
    {'email': u'Bob@some.domain.org',
    'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org',
    'nick': u'bob'}

Provide a list as input

    >>> context = HelloSchema.context\
        (   [ 'bob'
            , 'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
            ]
        )
    >>> pprint( context.result )
    {'email': u'Bob@some.domain.org',
    'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org',
    'nick': u'bob'}


*Note*: The domain part will be lowered ( local part is case-sensitive
acc. to specs )
you can disable this behaviour with Email(domainPart_toLower=False)

###  Nested Schemas

    >>> NestedSchema = Schema\
        ( 'people'
            , ForEach( HelloSchema ) & Len( max=2 )
        )

*Note*: ForEach creates new context childs ( as well as Schema ),
use ForEach( createContextChilds=False ) to disable this behaviour.

    >>> context = NestedSchema.context\
        (   { 'people':\
                [   { 'nick': 'bob'
                    , 'email': 'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
                    , 'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
                    }
                ,   { 'nick': 'jack'
                    , 'email': 'Jack@Some.Domain.Org'
                    , 'email_confirm': 'JACK@Some.domain.org'
                    }
                ]
            }
        )
    context('people.0.nick').result
    'bob'
    context('people.0.email').result
    'Bob@some.domain.org'
    context('people.0.email_confirm').result )
    'BOB@Some.domain.org'
    >>>
    >>> context.value = \
        ( [ { 'email':'Bob@Some.Domain.Org','email_confirm':'BOB@Some.domain.or' } ] )
    >>> try:
    ...     result = context.result
    ... except Invalid as e:
    ...     print (context.errorlist)
    ['/people.0.nick', '/people.0.email_confirm' ]

*Note*: Errors will only be appended to the errorList if the message is not
None. Schema and ForEach do have None set as 'fail' message, thus do not
populate the context with an error by default.

    >>> context( 'people.0.nick' ).error
    'Please provide a value'
    >>> context( 'people.0.email_confirm' ).error
    'Value must match bob@some.domain.org'


### HTTP POST friendly Schemas

    >>> NestedForm = web.NestedPost() & NestedSchema
    >>> context = NestedForm.context\
        (   { 'people.0.nick':'bob'
            , 'people.0.email':'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'people.0.email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
            , 'people.1.nick':'jack'
            , 'people.1.email':'Jack@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'people.1.email_confirm': 'JACK@Some.domain.org'
            }
        )
    >>> context.result
    {'people': [{'email': u'Bob@some.domain.org',
                 'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org',
                 'nick': u'bob'},
                {'email': u'Jack@some.domain.org',
                 'email_confirm': 'JACK@Some.domain.org',
                'nick': u'jack'}]}


##  (json) serialization

This is farly easy, since a context is a native dict.

    >>> pprint( context )
    {{{ lots of pretty printed stuff, you should see for yourself }}}
    >>> import json
    >>> json.dumps( context )
    {{{ lots of not so pretty printed stuff }}}


## Using decorators to validate Python functions

    >>> from require.adapter.native import validate
    >>> from pprint import pprint
    >>> @validate\
    ...     ( Schema\
    ...         ( 'someString', Missing('bob') | String()
    ...         , 'someInt', Integer()
    ...         , 'numbers', Blank([]) | Len(min=3) & ForEach( Integer() )
    ...         , 'params', Blank({}) | Len(max=3)\
    ...             & ForEach( String(), numericKeys=False, returnList=False )
    ...         )
    ...     , skip=('skipMe',)
    ...     )
    ... def someFunc( skipMe, someString, someInt, *numbers, **params ):
    ...     pprint (someString)
    ...     pprint (someInt)
    ...     pprint (numbers)
    ...     pprint (params)

*Notes*:

* You could also use a Schema instead of ForEach, it just have to return a list
  when used with *varargs or a dict when used with **kwargs
* The order does not matter in the root Schema, as the function will be inspected
  to convert any input *args, **kwargs into a dict.
* Use `skip` to exclude an argument from being validated. *varargs and **kwargs
  can also be skipped.
* Use `onInvalid` to specify an error callback. The signature of the error
  function is ( context, error ). It should raise an error or return a value.

Test that function:

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', someInt=1 )
    'bob'
    1
    ()
    {}

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', 'jack', 42, 3, 2, 1 )
    u'jack'
    42
    (3, 2, 1)
    {}

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', someInt=42, param1='p1', param2='p2' )
    'bob'
    42
    ()
    {'param1': u'p1', 'param2': u'p2'}

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', 'jack', 42, 3, 2 )
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: Invalid(
        { 'someString': 'jack', 'someInt': 42, 'numbers': [3, 2]
        , 'params': {}}, fail )


### Decorate Pylons actions

You can find a Pylons example app in examples/pylons.

Commit message:

split lib package
Split lib package into lib.advice, lib.constant and lib.base.
The constanst MISSING/PASS and advisors like messages() should now be
usable from within the cython module.

README.md, after:

require - a validation library
==============================

Aims to provide a comfortable way to validate any kind of input by defining
a clonable base ( similar to what formencode does ), implementing a set of
atomic core validators and a way to 'Compose' new validators from existing
ones.

Maintains a serializable state called 'Context' throughout each valditation
process which allows storing of input dependant metadata and provides
"validation on demand".
The Context can also be used to populate forms or to set request specific
parameters.


# Why bother ?

* Navigation through your data is easily done using
  `context( 'my.child.context' )` once you have created a Context.

* You do not need to maintain a certain order for Fields which are depending
  on other fields, because validation takes place on demand.
  E.g. this will work:

        Schema\
            ( 'email_confirm' , Match( Field('.email') )
            , 'email' , String()
            )

* Relative access by path of Fields during validation
  ( Field('..someChild') retrieves the value from a child called someChild
    relative to the parent context; root can be addressed by using '/' ).

* Access fields by index during validation ( `Field('.(0)')` will retrieve the
  value of the first field while `Field('.(-1)')` retrieves the last )

* Schemas can handle lists natively, because defined fields do have an order.
  One could use them to validate the \*varargs of a function or in chain after
  Split() and the like.

* Easy serialization of the whole context, containing errors and values which
  should be re-populated ( e.g. when your domain validator lowers the input ).

* Punycode-aware DomainLabel, Domain, and Email validator.


# Getting started

## Because we all like Hello World's

1) create a Validator

    >>> from require import *
    >>> Hello = String() \
        & Tmp( alter.Lower() & In( ['world', 'bob'] ) ) \
        & alter.Format('Hello %(value)s !')

*Note*: The `Tmp` validator means: do not return the result. 
In this case, `In` uses the result of `alter.Lower`, while the input value
for `alter.Format` remains unmodified.

2) bring the validator and a value into a context

    >>> context = Hello.context( 'World' )

3) get the result

    >>> context.result
    u'Hello World !'

set another value

    >>> context.value = 'Bob'

re-validate

    >>> context.result
    u'Hello Bob !'


##  Errors

    >>> context.value = 42
    >>> context.result
    Traceback ( most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: Invalid type (int), must be a string
    >>> context.error
    'Invalid type (int), must be a string'

### Custom error messages

    >>> Hello = String().messages(type='This is not a string, it is a "%(value.type)s" !') \
        & Tmp\
            ( alter.Lower()
            & In\
                ( ['world', 'bob']
                ).messages(fail='Please enter "bob" or "world", not "%(value)s".')
            ) \
        & alter.Format('Hello %(value)s !')
    >>> Hello.context( 42 ).result
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: This is not a string, it is a "int" !

### The errorFormatter

Errors messages are generated on demand and after the validation process, using an
`errorFormatter`. One can use his own function - which, for example, does the l13n stuff,
or retrieves messages by a certain error ID.

    >>> context.errorFormatter = lambda context, error:\
        ("Error at %s: %s" % (context.path, error.message ) ) % error.extra
    >>> context.error
    'Error at /: Invalid type (int), must be a string'


## Composing

Composing is useful if you want to reuse a certain validator with different
parameters or messages.

*Note*: Please take a look at `require.validator.web` for advanced
tag usage, since `DomainLabel`, `Domain`, `EmailLocalPart`, `Email` and `DateField`
are all composed.

    >>> Hello = Compose\
        ( String().tag('inputType') \
        & debug.Print('Entered: %(value)s').tag('printInput',False) \
        & Tmp\
            ( alter.Lower()
            & In\
                ( ['world', 'bob']
                ).tag('restrictInput')
            ) \
        & alter.Format('Hello %(value)s !').tag('output')
        ).paramAlias\
        ( restrict='restrictInput_required'
        ).messageAlias\
        ( restrict='restrictInput_fail'
        )

*Note*: An alias is a [tagName]_[parameterName] or a list of them or a function
returning a list of them.

    >>> myHello = Hello\
        ( restrict=['there','bob']
        , output_formatter='Hey %(value)s !'
        , printInput_enabled=True
        ).messages(restrict='Please enter one of %(required)s')
    >>> context = myHello.context( 'there' )
    >>> context.result
    Entered: there
    u'Hey there !
    >>> context.value = 42
    >>> context.result
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: Invalid type (int), must be a string

## Using validators as parameters

Any named parameter can also be a validator

    >>> String2Bytes = String() & Bytes( encoding=cache.Get('encoding','utf-8') )
    >>> context = String2Bytes.context( 'Jörg' )
    >>> context.cache['encoding'] = 'punycode'
    >>> context.result

*Note*: in require, a String is a unicode, and Bytes is a str - thus behaves
like you would expect from python 3. ( py2 unicode => py3 str; py2 str => py3 bytes )


## Schemas

A `Schema` takes dicts or list-likes as input and will return a dict or a list
if used with returnList=True.

*Note*: please take a look at require.validator.web.Email for some real-world
example

    >>> HelloSchema = Schema\
        ( 'nick'
            , String() & Len(max=20)
        , 'email'
            , web.Email()
        , 'email_confirm'
            , Match( Field('.email'), ignoreCase=True )
        )
    >>> context = HelloSchema.context\
        (   { 'nick':'bob'
            , 'email':'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
            }
        )
    >>> context('nick').result
    u'bob'
    >>> context('email').result
    u'Bob@some.domain.org'

    >>> from pprint import pprint
    >>> pprint( context.result )
    {'email': u'Bob@some.domain.org',
    'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org',
    'nick': u'bob'}

Provide a list as input

    >>> context = HelloSchema.context\
        (   [ 'bob'
            , 'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
            ]
        )
    >>> pprint( context.result )
    {'email': u'Bob@some.domain.org',
    'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org',
    'nick': u'bob'}


*Note*: The domain part will be lowered ( local part is case-sensitive
acc. to specs )
you can disable this behaviour with Email(domainPart_toLower=False)

###  Nested Schemas

    >>> NestedSchema = Schema\
        ( 'people'
            , ForEach( HelloSchema ) & Len( max=2 )
        )

*Note*: ForEach creates new context childs ( as well as Schema ),
use ForEach( createContextChilds=False ) to disable this behaviour.

    >>> context = NestedSchema.context\
        (   { 'people':\
                [   { 'nick': 'bob'
                    , 'email': 'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
                    , 'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
                    }
                ,   { 'nick': 'jack'
                    , 'email': 'Jack@Some.Domain.Org'
                    , 'email_confirm': 'JACK@Some.domain.org'
                    }
                ]
            }
        )
    context('people.0.nick').result
    'bob'
    context('people.0.email').result
    'Bob@some.domain.org'
    context('people.0.email_confirm').result )
    'BOB@Some.domain.org'
    >>>
    >>> context.value = \
        ( [ { 'email':'Bob@Some.Domain.Org','email_confirm':'BOB@Some.domain.or' } ] )
    >>> try:
    ...     result = context.result
    ... except Invalid as e:
    ...     print (context.errorlist)
    ['/people.0.nick', '/people.0.email_confirm' ]

*Note*: Errors will only be appended to the errorList if the message is not
None. Schema and ForEach do have None set as 'fail' message, thus do not
populate the context with an error by default.

    >>> context( 'people.0.nick' ).error
    'Please provide a value'
    >>> context( 'people.0.email_confirm' ).error
    'Value must match bob@some.domain.org'


### HTTP POST friendly Schemas

    >>> NestedForm = web.NestedPost() & NestedSchema
    >>> context = NestedForm.context\
        (   { 'people.0.nick':'bob'
            , 'people.0.email':'Bob@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'people.0.email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org'
            , 'people.1.nick':'jack'
            , 'people.1.email':'Jack@Some.Domain.Org'
            , 'people.1.email_confirm': 'JACK@Some.domain.org'
            }
        )
    >>> context.result
    {'people': [{'email': u'Bob@some.domain.org',
                 'email_confirm': 'BOB@Some.domain.org',
                 'nick': u'bob'},
                {'email': u'Jack@some.domain.org',
                 'email_confirm': 'JACK@Some.domain.org',
                'nick': u'jack'}]}


##  (json) serialization

This is farly easy, since a context is a native dict.

    >>> pprint( context )
    {{{ lots of pretty printed stuff, you should see for yourself }}}
    >>> import json
    >>> json.dumps( context )
    {{{ lots of not so pretty printed stuff }}}


## Using decorators to validate Python functions

    >>> from require.adapter.native import validate
    >>> from pprint import pprint
    >>> @validate\
    ...     ( Schema\
    ...         ( 'someString', Missing('bob') | String()
    ...         , 'someInt', Integer()
    ...         , 'numbers', Blank([]) | Len(min=3) & ForEach( Integer() )
    ...         , 'params', Blank({}) | Len(max=3)\
    ...             & ForEach( String(), numericKeys=False, returnList=False )
    ...         )
    ...     , skip=('skipMe',)
    ...     )
    ... def someFunc( skipMe, someString, someInt, *numbers, **params ):
    ...     pprint (someString)
    ...     pprint (someInt)
    ...     pprint (numbers)
    ...     pprint (params)

*Notes*:

* You could also use a Schema instead of ForEach, it just have to return a list
  when used with *varargs or a dict when used with **kwargs
* The order does not matter in the root Schema, as the function will be inspected
  to convert any input *args, **kwargs into a dict.
* Use `skip` to exclude an argument from being validated. *varargs and **kwargs
  can also be skipped.
* Use `onInvalid` to specify an error callback. The signature of the error
  function is ( context, error ). It should raise an error or return a value.

Test that function:

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', someInt=1 )
    'bob'
    1
    ()
    {}

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', 'jack', 42, 3, 2, 1 )
    u'jack'
    42
    (3, 2, 1)
    {}

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', someInt=42, param1='p1', param2='p2' )
    'bob'
    42
    ()
    {'param1': u'p1', 'param2': u'p2'}

    >>> someFunc( 'skipped', 'jack', 42, 3, 2 )
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    require.error.Invalid: Invalid(
        { 'someString': 'jack', 'someInt': 42, 'numbers': [3, 2]
        , 'params': {}}, fail )


### Decorate Pylons actions

You can find a Pylons example app in examples/pylons.
